So let's talk about
some common WordPress accessibility issues.
If you're not new to accessibility,
then these are not going to be surprises.
There are no surprises here.
WordPress accessibility issues are very much the same issues
that we see across all sites regardless
of content management system.
So we could just as easily say,
these are common accessibility issues on sites.
But WordPress accessibility issues that exist
that we see common are lack of keyboard support.
So you saw the default install, right?
And you saw me tapping through it
and it had good keyboard support just right there.
We break keyboard support in WordPress,
when we make modifications to the default.
So we may install a theme from someone we don't know.
But it looks pretty, right?
And it may have the layout and functionality
that we feel is right for our content and our audiences.
So we do that, we put those themes or plugins
in place in WordPress because they perform
a specific function that we feel like we need.
But then WordPress accessibility gets broken.
And so one of those things
that lack of keyboard support is very very common
where we won't see visible focus outlines
or we'll see things like
spans or divs used in place of buttons or links,
and I can show you sites
and we'll pull examples from the wordpress.org showcase.
So the showcase of some of the best sites on the internet
that WordPress is proud of to promote,
they still have some of these common accessibility issues.
Some are fantastic and very accessible.
But some are shining examples
of how you can break accessibility
by modifying the defaults.
So lack of keyboard support, one of the big ones.
So that includes menus.
So when you're going through a menu right,
like the main navigation menu
and you are wanting to
expand a sub menu,
sometimes those are not made in a keyboard friendly way.
The mobile menus, for instance,
sometimes those are just clickable elements with a mouse
and don't respond to a keyboard event.
Links and buttons, I talked a little bit about those.
But if you code those incorrectly
and you bake those into your theme,
then all of your links and buttons won't work
for someone with a keyboard.
Accordion controls, so those typically rely on a button
or some other piece of code that is focusable.
So focusable means when you tab to it
or when you get to that element that it takes keyboard focus
and you can do something with it.
You can interact with that element.
Well accordions are those expand and contract modules.
We see those on frequently asked questions
a lot of the time, that they can be on any kind of
content where you hide the content initially
but then reveal it upon interaction, right.
So accordions are something that we see quite often
don't have good keyboard support and carousels.
I have an emoji of a cat doing the famous scream pose.
Where with cat's paws are on each side of its face.
If you must use a carousel,
you must think about accessibility with them
and we see keyboard support
lacking in carousels almost all the time.
You can make carousels accessible for a keyboard.
So I talked a little bit about no visible focus,
that's something that is a designed decision that gets made.
Sometimes people don't even realize
they're making that design decision,
because the theme developer made that for them.
And they are just installing the theme.
And they don't even realize that
visible focus styles have been removed.
Form label issues.
So we see these a lot where you have a form builder
and the form builder allows you to drag and drop
and create a form
and then maybe the theme
support certain types of forms
and they have their own styling for those
and that styling then removes the labels somehow
or just doesn't use labels whatsoever.
So we see that quite a bit in WordPress sites.
So we'll talk about how to spot those as well.
Form validation and error handling.
So who here has ever tried to
fill out a form online
and made a mistake.
I know both my hands are up
and they're waving frantically right now,
because I do that all the time.
I wish that I was perfect at filling out forms,
but I constantly mess those up.
And for folks with disabilities,
form validation and error handling,
if it's done in an inaccessible way.
If it's presented inaccessibly,
that can create a very confusing off-putting
and just barrier-laden experience
where you might just walk away
and not complete the transaction, whatever it is.
Filling out a contact form or making a purchase.
So having good form validation and error handling
and making sure that it's accessible
is something that we see a real need for.
Jesse asked another question,
"Are on-hover triggers dangerous for accessibility?"
They can be.
So if you hover over something
and it triggers something else to open up,
that might be an unexpected change in context.
But what happens if you focus on that element?
Should it behave the exact same way as you hovering over it?
My sense is yes.
And what we see with those things,
when something is revealed,
like in a menu, if you hover over them,
then the top level menu item,
but it has child menu items under it, sub menu items,
then those typically get forgotten about
in terms of what happens with the keyboard only user
that's not hovering over with a mouse.
So those can be those can be
very problematic for accessibility.
They can be made accessible.
And there are a number of other concerns
around accessibility besides just keyboard support
for on-hover interactions,
like if somebody zoomed in,
and if somebody zoomed in,
are they going to miss out on what gets revealed
if they're hovering over something,
and then something is revealed
in a different location on the page.
So, that's a real issue there.
And I see some discussion about plugins,
to make other plugins more accessible,
and we'll certainly talk about those
and those are great suggestions
from Deborah and Sumner.
Hi, Sumner. Hi, Deborah.
And Karen had a question as well.
"Will using a premium form plugin like Gravity Forms,
help to make forms more accessible than
using a themes form stylings or another plugin?"
So my answer to that
and I'll have some more information on plugins in a bit.
But my answer is some plugins that handle things,
these commercial plugins,
they have some good defaults but they're far from perfect
and that is why we see the other comments
in the chat about some of the plugins
like contact form seven accessible defaults
as well as the Gravity Forms
has a wicked to form fields plugin,
which help make things more accessible with those.
So those are all excellent plugins to consider using
and I wouldn't shy away from looking at plugins
to help make your design and development
and launch of your WordPress site
the best it can be, right.
But we also want to think about accessibility
and sometimes these plugin developers
haven't taken into consideration accessibility
very fully or sometimes at all.
And so to the rescue or some of these other patch plugins.